Apollo 17 was the final mission of NASA's Apollo program, the most recent
time humans have set foot on the Moon or traveled beyond low Earth orbit.
Commander Gene Cernan and Lunar Module Pilot Harrison Schmitt walked on
the Moon, while Command Module Pilot Ronald Evans orbited above. Schmitt
was the only professional geologist to land on the Moon, selected in
place of Joe Engle with NASA under pressure to send a scientist to the
Moon. The mission's heavy emphasis on science meant the inclusion of a
number of new experiments, including a biological experiment containing
five mice carried in the command module.

Mission planners considered two primary goals in selecting the landing
site: to sample lunar highland material older than Mare Imbrium and to
investigate the possibility of relatively recent volcanic activity.
They thus selected Taurus–Littrow, where formations that had been viewed
and pictured from orbit were thought to be volcanic in nature. Since all
three crew members had backed up previous Apollo lunar missions, they
were familiar with the Apollo spacecraft and had more time for geology
training.

Launched at 12:33 a.m. Eastern Standard Time on December 7, 1972, after
the only launch-pad delay in the Apollo program caused by a hardware
problem, Apollo 17 was a "J-type" mission that included three days on the
lunar surface, extended scientific capability, and the use of the third
Lunar Roving Vehicle (LRV). Cernan and Schmitt landed in the
Taurus–Littrow valley and completed three moonwalks, taking lunar samples
and deploying scientific instruments. Orange soil was discovered at Shorty
crater, and proved to be volcanic in origin, although from early in the
Moon's history. Evans remained in lunar orbit in the command and service
module (CSM), taking scientific measurements and photographs. The
spacecraft returned to Earth on December 19.
